# Towards Evaluating the Built-Environment: A Hybridized Approach for Identifying Building Entrance Accessibility

Preprocessing and modeling scripts for Carleton University DATA 500 course project. Project objectives are to develop a binary classifier through deep learning (convolutional neural networks, or CNNs) for predicting whether an image is "accessible" or "inaccessible".

In 2019, the federal government initiated Accessibility Standards Canada [1] to prioritize a barrier-free Canada by 2040, however, there are data gaps on the infrastructure that make the built-environment inaccessible for the 9.6% of people over 15 years-old who have mobility disabilities [2]. Identifying the various barriers for those with mobility restrictions is complex. Hence, hybridized approaches for collecting accessibility data are growing with new technologies and techniques, such as with deep learning [3,4]. This research seeks to support this movement by using open source crowdsourced street-level images from Mapillary [5] and convolutional neural networks (CNN) to develop and test a binary image classifier that predicts whether a building’s entrance is accessible or inaccessible. Following methods by Wu et al. (2019) [3], we seek to answer: Can a CNN model trained on open source images, from Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, yield accurate results when applied to classify the accessibility of building entrances? 

Based on local knowledge and OpenStreetMap building footprint geometries, see in [this interactive map](https://noznoc.github.io/access-classifier/index.html), images capturing buildings at varying angles were compiled for Ottawa by leveraging the Mapillary API [4] with Python scripts. Human review of images led to a current dataset of 843 images, 421 were grouped as “Accessible” (Figure 2) and 422 as “Inaccessible” (Figure 3). Broadly defined, “Accessible” images show buildings with doors that are connected to an accessible exterior pathway [7]. A single image could have captured multiple buildings, and vice versa.

Though results indicate overfitting, this project contributes to the exploration of open source data and deep learning to streamline collecting information on infrastructure barriers for policy-making and inclusive wayfinding. For example, this model could be integrated within feature extraction systems for identifying infrastructure barriers of the built-environment, similar to what [4] is proposing for sidewalk barriers. Further, a scaled and optimized version of this model could be added in autonomous vehicles’ navigation systems to better service those with mobility disabilities.

- [1] Angus Reid Institute. 2015. Disability and Accessibility: Canadians see significant room for improvement in communities where they live. https://angusreid.org/rhf-accessibility/.
- [2] Statistics Canada’s 2017 Survey on Disability. 2017. https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/11-627-m/11-627-m2020085-eng.htm.
- [3] Jiawei Wu, Wenliang Hu, Joseph Coelho, Paromita Nitu, Hanna Paul, Praveen Madiraju, Roger Smith, Sheikh Ahamed. 2019. Identifying Buildings with Ramp Entrances Using Convolutional Neural Networks. 2019 IEEE 43rd Annual Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC) (July 2019), 74–79.
- [4] Galen Weld, Esther Jang, Anthony Li, Aileen Zeng, Kurtis Heimerl, Jon Froehlich. 2019. Deep Learning for Automatically Detecting Sidewalk Accessibility Problems Using Streetscape Imagery. The 21st International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS '19). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 196–209. doi:10.1145/3308561.3353798.
- [5] Mapillary is an open source repository of crowdsourced street-level images available under the CC BY-SA 4.0.
- [6] © OpenStreetMap contributors. Modified OSM data is available on GitHub:  https://github.com/Noznoc/access-classifier/tree/main/data.
- [7] United Nations. 2003. Accessibility for the Disabled - A Design Manual for a Barrier Free Environment. https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/enable/designm/AD2-06.htm.
- [8] Statistics Canada. 2017. Classification of Building Permit Type. https://www23.statcan.gc.ca/imdb/p3VD.pl?Function=getVD&TVD=146088.
- [9] Joseph Gildenblat. 2018. Class activation maps in Keras for visualizing where deep learning networks pay attention. https://jacobgil.github.io/deeplearning/class-activation-maps.
